# Chapter 1 - A Tutorial Introduction

* Language: English
* Created Date: 2021 May 07 Fri
* Publish Date:
* Published URL: github.coma/andrewwoods/learning-c


The chapter begins where every programming language tutorial begins -
hello world. Their example of compiling hello world uses the GCC
compiler. They advise the reader to check with an expert on how to
compile on your system. I'm on a Mac, and had previously run a xcode
related command that installed the CLang compiler. So I run this to
compile my code

```
$ clang hello.c
```

This gives me the following output.

```
hello-world.c:3:1: warning: type specifier missing, defaults to 'int' [-Wimplicit-int]
```

The compiler wants me to add `int` as the return type.

My modern C compiler gives me this warning, because by default it uses
the "ISO  C  2011 with GNU extensions", and the 2nd edition of the book
was written in 1988. So I'm setting an option to use the C89 standard
for compilation. This removes the warning.

```
$ clang -std=c89 hello-world.c
```

Just like their example, the clang compiler supports `-o` option to
change the name of the output file.

```
$ clang -std=c89 -o hello-world hello-world.c
```

Examine my [hello world](../ch-01/hello-world.c).
=
## Temperature Conversion

The authors introduce the variables, symbolic constants, and the while loop. The
first code example of temperature conversion from fahrenheit to celsius uses
integer math. The authors use it to demonstrate that data can get lost by using
the wrong types of data. In their subsequent code, they change the farenheit and
celsius values to floats.


Examine my [temperature code](../ch-01/temperature.c).

## Character Input and Output

This section of the chapter does a good job of explaining how the code works.
New aspects of the stdio.h library are discussed at it plays a larger role in
this chapter. The `getchar()` and `putchar()` functions are used to retrieve and
display a character, respectively.

The thing they fail to say explicitly is that these text streams that they
discuss means that you need to redirect standard input to your program. Not a
big deal for me. However, if someone were learning C as their first programming
language and using this book to learn, they might know how to run their program
to get it to work. So, for the people in that circumstance, here's how you run
it.

Assuming your program is called `copyio`, you can pass a file to it.

```
$ ./copyio < file.txt
```

You can also pass the output of a command to your program

```
$ ls -l | ./copyio
```

Now you can see that you've created a simple version of the `cat` command.

Examine my [copyio code](../ch-01/copyio.c).


### Character Counting

The character counting program introduces the prefix increment operator `++n`,
which already very familiar to any PHP developer. They make a note that it may
be more efficient - which makes me wonder if C compilers optimize this sort of
thing.

There's some explanation of how `int` and `long` values have the same size on
some systems, while on others `long` values have greater capacity.

Examine my [char-count code](../ch-01/char-count.c).


#### Bash Function

I got tired of fiddling with the compilation command, in order to match the
output filename to the source filename. So I created this compile function to
keep things simple. Call it like `compiile hello.c` then look for `hello` in the
same directory. Feel free to copy this function to your `~/.bashrc`, but
__remember to match the compiler to the one you're using__.

```bash
#
# Name the ouuput file the same name as the the source code file but
# without the .c extension, and compile the source code
#
# @param string $filename A source code filename ending with .c
#
# @return void
#
compile()
{
    source="$1"

    len=$(strlen $source)
    last=$(calc "${len}-2")
    output="${source:0:$last}"

    echo "Compiling ${output}"

    clang -std=c89 -o $output $source
    chmod a+x $output
}
```


### Line Counting

They introduce the concept of character constants. A PHP developer might tempted
to gloss over the this code - due to the fact, that they appear as single-quoted
strings. In PHP, the single quotes create a string literal. But in C, these
character constants are automatically converted to their ASCII values. So A => 65,
B => 66, C => 67, and so on. I found that interesting.

Examine my [line-count code](../ch-01/line-count.c).


**Exercise 1-8:** Write a program to count blanks, tabs, and newlines.

[my solution for exercise 1-8](../ch-01/ex-01-08-solution.c).


**Exercise 1-9:** Write a program to copy its input to its output, replacing
each string of one or more blanks by a single blank.

[my solution for exercise 1-9](../ch-01/ex-01-09-solution.c).


**Exercise 1-10:** write a program to copy its input to its output, replacing
each tab by \t, each backspace by \b, and each backslash by \\. this makes tabs
and backspaces visible in an unambiguous way.

This exercise seems a little weird to me, since you have to render two characters
to represent the single character in the data, but whatever.

[my solution for exercise 1-10](../ch-01/ex-01-10-solution.c).

**Exercise 1-11:** To effectively test this code, you need several data files
each testing for a particular aspect, with known data. At the minimum you'd need
the following.

* one word on one line
* two words on one line
* two words on one line with a tab
* one word on two lines
* two words on two lines
* two words on two lines with a tab
* two words on two lines with two tabs

In addition, you could check if certain characters at the start of the line, at
the end of the line, combining certain characters together - in an effort to
test boundary conditions.

## Arrays

Building upon the sample code in this section, I wrote a solution for exercise
1-13, where you create a histogram chart that examines word lengths.

[my solution for exercise 1-13](../ch-01/ex-01-13-solution.c).

In my chart, I'm using counts of lengths. So, five-letter words were found 8
times, then I would draw 8 characters, defined in the BAR_CHARACTER constant.
The flaw in this design is that if they were found 130 times, I would draw 130
characters. It'd be better to calculate percentages, and display the chart based
on those values instead.

## Functions

Functions in C are similar to a function PHP when you include typehints. Except
in C, the type hints are mandatory. The compiler has to verify the data coming
into the function against the function signature.

A key difference between C functions and PHP functions, is that C functions
require you to specify a function prototype that matches the signature in the
function declaration.

There was a previous style of defining functions in the early days of C. The
style that we're used to today, was *new* when this book was updated in the
1980s.

## Arguments - Call by Value

All funciton arguments in C pass their variables by value. Passing arguments by
value makes programs more compact, becuase we don't have to worry about
variables that aren't related to what our function does.

The authors mention that arrays are treated differently, passing a pointer to
the beginning of the array. The contents of the array are not copied. more
memory efficient. This still allows you to operate on the contents of the array.


## Character Arrays

In this section, the authors provide a sample program to check for the longest
input lines. I've typed it up in the file called `longest-line.c`, when creates
two functions - `getline` and `copy`. However, you try to call the `getline`
function the C compiler throws an error because the stdio.h library already has
a function with the same name, but different arguments. In `longest-line.c` I
rename it to `mygetline` to prevent this naming collision. I'm assuming that
this function was added to `stdio.h` sometime after the book was published.

Of the 4 exercises, i only worked on 1-17. It was a pretty easy change.
I didn't want to spend the time doing all the exercises.

[my solution for exercise 1-17](../ch-01/ex-01-17-solution.c).

## External Variables and Scope

This external variables get their name from the fact that they are defined
external, or outside of, any function. They are what other languages call global
variables. This section is useful for being able to recognize external variables
and to know what they do, but I have no interest in implementing them. So I've
forgone the exercise to writing their sample code.

The authors have been making the careful distinction between the words
*definition* and *declaration*.

**Definition** refers to the place where the variable is created or assigned
storage.

**Declaration** refers to places where the nature of the variable is stated but
not storage is allocated.

There are 5 exercises at the end of the section - 1-20 through 1-24. These are
interesting coding exercises. I might come back to these. However, I'm currently
more interested in moving on to Chapter Two.
